---
layout: post
title: Heroku for Dinosaurs
permalink: /heroku2/
categories: [Todo App]
tags: [javascript, node, cloud]
---

*This post is part of a series on the [Todo App]({{site.url}}/posts-by-categories/)*

## Another todo app, really?

Yes, todo apps make great example projects because they cover the major bases of any stack. I also wanted a todo app that didn't seem to exist. Rather than set dates and times for things to be due, I wanted something for repeating tasks like doing dishes and laundry. The time for these is mostly interval based so I came up with a "percent late" method of tracking them. The idea is roughly:
* Set an interval for a task, say 1 day.
* Track the most recent completion of that task with a timestamp.
* Calculate how "late" or "due" that task is with: (now-timestamp)/interval
* Sort the list of tasks by this now normalized value

## The Tech Stack

As the first post touched on we will be using node.js and Heroku. On top of that I will also be learning angular(2+) for this. It is overkill and honestly if I ever release this for public use I will probably just skip the frontend frameworks in general or use react for some basic component generation. However I learn best by doing and I have some work related to angular that I want to be better equipped for, 2 birds 1 stone and all that. For data storage I'm using Postgres, also on Heroku. For user authentication we are using Google's Cloud Identity api and express-session.

## Project Setup

Now lets get to work. The basic project setup is pretty standard but I included it for completeness. We want to make a new node project, add some stuff for heroku to better be in sync with our local node versions, and then install our dependencies. Make sure to use your own contact info and version numbers if you are making this from scratch rather than pulling from github. This is also a good time to bring up [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm). You really should be using a node version manager of some kind and if you are on linux or macOS nvm is super simple.

### Create a new node project

**Create new directory and initial package.json**
{% highlight bash %}
mkdir todo
cd todo
npm init
{% endhighlight %}

**package.json with engines set and pre/post install scripts for later Heroku use**
{% highlight json %}
{
  "name": "todo",
  "version": "0.0.1",
  "description": "Interval Based Todo App",
  "main": "server.js",
  "scripts": {
    "postinstall": "",
    "preinstall": ""
  },
  "engines": {
    "node": "8.11.4",
    "npm": "6.8.0"
  },
  "repository": {
    "type": "git",
    "url": "git+ssh://git@github.com/BohemianHacks/todo.git"
  },
  "author": "Jeff Blecha <jeff.blecha@gmail.com> (https://bohemianhacks.github.io/)",
  "license": "MIT",
  "bugs": {
    "url": "https://github.com/BohemianHacks/todo/issues"
  },
  "homepage": "https://github.com/BohemianHacks/todo#readme"
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Postgres setup


## Google Cloud Identity

Rather than bog down users with a new password and account name to remember its generally better to use social logins for smaller applications. I prefer google so thats what we are using. The setup is pretty straight forward and I mostly followed a [great tutorial](https://medium.com/@jackrobertscott/how-to-use-google-auth-api-with-node-js-888304f7e3a0) by Jack Scott. I changed a few things and made it into a module we can easily import.

First we need to get some basic setup out of the way:
1. Install the node libraries:

    {% highlight bash %}
    cd todo
    npm install googleapis
    {% endhighlight %}
2. Get API credentials and enable cloud identity as well as google+. ([Documentation](https://developers.google.com/+/web/api/rest/oauth))
3. Pop those credentials and your redirect url into environment variables, both on heroku and our local .env

    {% highlight bash %}
    heroku config:set GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID=<Your ID with .apps.googleusercontent.com here>
    heroku config:set GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET=<Your Secret>
    heroku config:set GOOGLE_REDIRECT_URL='https://<your app name here>.herokuapp.com/app'
    heroku config:get -s GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID  >> .env
    heroku config:get -s GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET  >> .env
    heroku config:get -s GOOGLE_REDIRECT_URL  >> .env
    {% endhighlight %}

## Backend Validation

## Closing Thoughts

This ended up being more a review of Heroku than I intended but dinosaurs tend to gripe about things while learning. The next post in this series will be more focused on the code for the project and how it interacts specifically with the features of Heroku mentioned here. I hope it has been somewhat informative or at least an enjoyable read.
